NARRATOR: Tonight on
The Curse of Oak Isl
-CHARLES: Oh!
-TERRY: Whoa!
-CHARLES: We got wood.
-It looks like
it might be a new shaft.
-It changes the whole story.
-TERRY: Yeah.
We could be looking at
the Money Pit.
STEPHAN:
There's significant
anomalies in this area.
Wow! That is huge.
We need to dig.
GARY:
Oh, yeah.
Look at that.
-That is sweet.
-RICK: Whoa!
This is Roman.
-Roman?
-No way.
Definitely from 300 BC.
-Roman, baby!
-(all laughing)
It's remarkable.
NARRATOR:
There is an island
in the North Atlantic
where people
have been looking for
an incredible treasure
for more than 200 years.
So far, they have found
a stone slab
with strange symbols
carved into it...
...man-made workings
that date to medieval times,
and a lead cross
whose origin may be connected
to the Knights Templar.
To date, six men have died
trying to solve the mystery.
And according to legend,
one more will have to die
before the treasure
can be found.
♪ ♪
MARTY:
Gentlemen.
What's going on
out in the field?
So I want to get you up-to-date
and try to figure out
where to go next
-in the Money Pit area.
-Okay.
CRAIG:
Got different ideas of
where the Money Pit might be
-based on different records.
-That's right.
NARRATOR: As a new day
begins on Oak Island,
brothers Rick and Marty Lagina
along with their partner
Craig Tester
have gathered for
an important meeting
with members of their team
in the research center.
RICK:
We have to
take advantage of the fact
that the Garden Shaft project
is on hold because it presents
unique opportunities
to conduct more drilling
in the Money Pit area.
All right. Good.
NARRATOR:
Unfortunately, due to
permitting issues,
the team's reconstruction
of the Garden Shaft
in the Money Pit area,
which began one month ago,
is currently on hold.
It is in this
80-foot-deep structure
that Rick, Marty,
Craig and the team
have not only
collected wood samples
that have been dated
to the early 18th century
but also conducted water tests
that yielded high trace
evidence of gold.
So let's just summarize what's
going on in the Money Pit.
-Yeah.
-CRAIG: Yes.
NARRATOR:
Now, as they await permission
for the project to proceed,
the team must decide how best
to continue their pursuit
of the fabled
Money Pit treasure vault,
and the ultimate answers
to a 228-year-old mystery.
One thing we can discuss while
we're right in this area...
You know, you can see
what we drilled around there.
SCOTT:
We have five holes all along
there defining a tunnel.
MARTY:
Right.
So we started out with K-15.5.
-K-15.5?
-SCOTT: Yeah.
So we drilled there
and we hit a direct hit.
We hit wood around 103 feet.
I mean, it was the
first time that we felt
that we had ever drilled into
a tunnel that was still open.
Yeah.
Whoa, what's that?
Whoa, whoa, what's that?
That's a view down the tunnel.
-SCOTT: Oh, wow.
-RICK: It's awesome.
NARRATOR: One recent
discovery that the team
is considering for
further investigation
is a five-foot-high
wood-cribbed tunnel
which they have encountered at
five separate drilling locations
at a depth of 103 feet.
This structure has not only been
carbon-dated to as early
as the 17th century
but may also be leading
in the direction
of the Garden Shaft.
RICK:
Here we have a man-made
structure underground
at a consistent elevation.
So of course, your mind runs
to the possibility
that this tunnel,
if it is confirmed,
runs towards the Garden Shaft.
And there might be
"X marks the spot"
at the end of that tunnel.
CRAIG:
You know, then the question is,
do we continue
pursuing this tunnel?
Or is there a want
to move to D-17.5?
This one is right offset
to the Garden Shaft,
where we could intercept
this 70-foot tunnel,
which was first found in D-17.
NARRATOR:
Five weeks ago,
the team drilled into
another tunnel in Borehole D-17,
at a depth of just 70 feet
that they've speculated
could be leading to
an offset treasure chamber
extending away from
the original Money Pit.
It's odd that it's
at that depth.
It almost has to be
an offset chamber.
There's no point having an
upward facing tunnel, is there?
NARRATOR: What makes this
an ideal location
for the team to investigate now,
is that it sets just 20 feet
south of the Garden Shaft.
Because when they and the team
from Dumas Contracting Limited
are given permission to continue
with the operation to clear out
and reconstruct a new,
waterproof shaft
down to at least
the 80-foot depth,
if any evidence of
man-made voids or structures
are detected nearby,
lateral tunnels can be
constructed off the main shaft
in order to allow the team to
search for potential valuables.
RICK:
Finding the wood in D-17
is important simply because
it suggests strongly that
this is original work.
We've never encountered wood
at that elevation before.
So everything that we find,
everything we uncover,
will be new to us
and thus will be exciting.
CRAIG:
So we're actually
looking for two things--
the 70-foot
and the 100-foot tunnel?
-Yep.
-MARTY: Okay.
So, where are we
going next, then?
We should talk about it.
-Yeah.
-CRAIG: To me, I guess,
do we want to
look for this tunnel
up towards
the Garden Shaft at D-17?
We have no records
of this tunnel.
Is it a tunnel leading to
an offset chamber?
Yeah. Possibly.
CRAIG:
So we could drill a well to try
to define this D-17 tunnel
-at D-17.5.
-MARTY: Yeah, yeah.
As long as we're getting
the gold data,
I guess I'm okay with it.
For me,
that's the objective there.
Really get an idea of
the orientation of the tunnel.
-Yeah.
-So those are my thoughts.
CRAIG:
Yeah, okay.
So we're gonna
move down to D-17.5.
MARTY:
Good.
I'd like to know
more about that thing.
And I would like a water sample,
maybe a couple as you go down.
Yes.
RICK:
So let the data speak.
Let the science speak.
-Let's see where this goes.
-Yes.
All right, guys. Let's go.
-SCOTT: Thank you.
-MARTY: Thank you.
NARRATOR:
Later that morning...
TERRY:
D-17.5.
-This could be it.
-TEDFORD: All right.
Look, you've got nothing
north of you.
So that's why I want you to
cover that ground.
-Sweet.
-Okay. Go for it.
TEDFORD:
That's good.
NARRATOR: ...as geologist
Terry Matheson
and Oak Island historian
Charles Barkhouse
supervise the drilling
of Borehole D-17.5
in the Money Pit area...
TEDFORD:
There we go.
-GARY: This is a nice
little area of Lot 5.
-Okay.
NARRATOR:
...Rick Lagina
and metal detection expert
Gary Drayton
arrive on Lot 5,
located on the western side
of Oak Island.
GARY:
I've already been in here, mate,
and I've put
a lot of flags down.
There's a lot of
good-sounding targets.
So as far as I'm concerned,
it's raining with
a chance of artifacts.
(laughs)
So first flag's over here, mate.
-Okay.
-Let's get stuck in.
NARRATOR:
One week ago, after purchasing
this four-acre property
from the estate of Robert Young,
who passed away in 2020...
This is the in past now, mate.
To the future.
-Let's get started.
-GARY: Okay.
NARRATOR:
...Rick and Gary
quickly unearthed
several potentially
important clues.
GARY:
Look at that.
NARRATOR:
These include
two possible iron chisels
and a cut, hammered coin
which metallurgy analysis
suggests could date back to
the 16th century or earlier.
All right.
-(detector beeping)
-That sounds good.
NARRATOR:
Now, after flagging a number
of additional
metal targets in the area,
Gary and Rick have
received permission
from archaeologist Laird Niven
to find out what other potential
answers Lot 5 may reveal
about the Oak Island mystery.
RICK:
The ground is so rocky.
-(detector beeping)
-GARY: Come on,
little artifacts.
Yep, that's it.
What do we got here, mate?
What the heck... is that?
RICK:
If you don't know, I don't know.
-I mean, what...?
-It's a metal acorn.
(chuckling) Yeah, that's what
I was thinking as well.
This really is nuts.
(both laugh)
RICK:
Yeah, I don't know
what that is.
GARY:
It's heavy, it's crude.
It's not perfect.
You can see
it's not factory-made.
I mean, feel how heavy
that is, mate.
RICK:
Huh, it's heavy.
-GARY: Yeah.
-RICK: It's very dense.
GARY:
And the interesting thing
about this is
we're like maybe
30 feet away from where we found
that piece of bell metal.
NARRATOR:
One year ago,
while searching on
the adjacent Lot 4,
Gary and Jack Begley found
a piece of bell metal,
which chemist
Dr. Christa Brosseau believed
may have been a fragment
of an ancient cannon
and possibly
Portuguese in origin.
Okay, mate, we're bagging it
-'cause it looks old.
-RICK: Yep.
NARRATOR:
Is it possible
that Rick and Gary
have found another clue on Lot 5
that could help identify
just who may have been behind
the 228-year-old
treasure mystery?
So next flag...
-(detector beeping)
-RICK: Somewhere in here.
RICK:
Not bad.
GARY:
Yep. Not bad sounding.
Just there.
I'm going to take me jacket off
cause I mean business now.
Things are hotting up.
Okay, let's see if you moved it.
(beeping)
And you've moved it
'cause it sounds better.
(beeping)
-RICK: Oh, what's that?
-GARY: It's singing.
Wow! Look at that.
-(beeping)
-GARY: It's singing.
Oh, I love
these little finds, mate.
It's a musket ball. Yeah.
NARRATOR:
On Lot 5, located on
the western side of Oak Island,
Rick Lagina and Gary Drayton
have just found
what could be
a very important clue.
Might not have been fired but...
-RICK: Doesn't look fired.
-GARY: Yeah.
But I love it when we find
stuff like this, I mean,
you're going back
to black powder weapons.
So you know you're going back.
Maybe you're talking late 1500s.
Yeah.
NARRATOR:
A musket ball?
Potentially dating back
to the 16th century?
Could it be related
to the ancient tools
and the hammered coin
that were also
recently found on Lot 5?
If so, who brought them here?
And just what were
they doing on Oak Island?
And there is a way to
date this, mate.
We can measure the diameter
and see what caliber it is
because this does seem
on the small side.
-Well, that is baggable.
-Yeah, definitely.
That is a bona fide artifact.
This is just the beginning
of the story, mate.
NARRATOR:
The following day...
-RICK: Good morning, gentlemen.
-SCOTT: Hi, fellas.
-CRAIG: Hey, guys.
-RICK: Hi.
-Morning.
-RICK: Stephan,
I know that you
post-processed the grid
on the north end of the swamp
and I personally am
-very interested in it.
-NARRATOR: Rick Lagina
gathers in the war room
with members of the team
to meet via video conference
with ground penetrating
radar expert, Stephan Grund.
RICK: We all know that
prior to his passing,
Fred was kind enough
to inform us
of a possibility of
a log structure
in the north end of the swamp.
So I very much
look forward to this
because if there's
a log wall there, that is huge.
That-That's original work.
If it's there.
-STEPHAN: Okay, I'm good to go.
-PETER: Yep.
NARRATOR:
One week ago,
following a preliminary
geophysical scan of the swamp
which identified a curious
underground anomaly
near the northern border,
Stephan conducted a follow-up
ground penetrating radar scan
of the area with Rick and
Marty's nephew Peter Fornetti
-and landowner Tom Nolan.
-Thank you.
NARRATOR:
It was in this same area
on Lot 10 where Tom's
late father Fred Nolan
found evidence
of what he believed
could be a man-made dam.
A dam that may have been
constructed centuries ago
to create
the triangle-shaped swamp
in order to hide
something of great value.
I'm gonna let you
tell us what you learned.
STEPHAN:
Yes, definitely.
NARRATOR:
Now, having fully processed
his GPR data,
Stephan is prepared to review
his findings with the team.
So let me start with the scans
with the OKM Geppard GPR.
We do see significant
anomalies in this area.
Coming from the left
to the right
at around three feet depth.
I quickly want to
open another scan.
This is very interesting
because we do see here again
anomalies cut
in the middle of the grid
from the left to the right
and those are between two
and eight feet depth.
So it's a duplication
more or less.
Wow.
NARRATOR:
Numerous anomalies
running in a linear pattern
between three
and eight feet deep
just north of the swamp?
Could it be evidence to
support Fred Nolan's theory
regarding a potential
man-made dam?
RICK:
The information
that Stephan relayed to us,
I found it
incredibly intriguing.
His interpretation
of the data suggests
a linear anomaly is in an area
that Fred thought was certainly
worthy of further investigation.
I believe that Fred was
truthful about probing
such a structure
or finding such a structure.
And I think
if you come to a point
where you think
a target is legit,
then you need to dig.
Well, thank you for that
because it's very curious.
Craig, do you have any thoughts?
Just, uh, I mean,
get Tom involved, um, obviously.
So it'll be interesting to see
what he thinks
about this location.
Yeah, 100%.
The next steps would be
obviously to inform Tom.
And then it would be up to Tom
to decide how to proceed.
My hope is, after hearing
there is an anomaly there,
that Tom will
acquiesce to, to dig.
Anyways, Stephan,
I hate to say it,
but... you're gonna be
getting a lot more data.
(laughs)
I'm looking forward to it.
RICK:
Fair enough.
Careful what you wish for.
(laughs)
Great.
RICK:
Thank you very much.
Appreciate it.
NARRATOR:
As Rick and members of the team
finish their meeting
in the war room,
in the Money Pit area...
-Looks like we got
a core coming.
-TERRY: Yep.
...Terry Matheson
and Charles Barkhouse continue
supervising the drilling
operation in Borehole D-17.5...
Thank you.
...where they hope to once again
penetrate a mysterious tunnel
at a depth of some 70 feet.
BRANDON:
39 feet.
-TERRY: Thank you.
-BRANDON: Got some wood
at the bottom of that.
TERRY:
That's the bottom. What?
We got some wood
at the bottom of this.
-39?
-Well, 39. How about that?
We've got wood.
-That's odd.
-Okay.
At 39 feet.
That's an interesting outcome,
don't you think, Charles?
-Scalpel, please.
-Scalpel.
Thank you.
Wow!
Charles, what we got is wood.
We got a lot of wood here, too.
NARRATOR:
A large quantity of wood?
At a depth of just 39 feet
in Borehole D-17.5?
And less than 20 feet
south of the Garden Shaft?
TERRY:
This is really
interesting, Charles.
CHARLES:
It's just...
A tunnel at 39 feet
-does not make sense.
-No, it doesn't.
CHARLES:
I'm wondering if we caught
an edge of a shaft.
NARRATOR:
If the team has in fact
encountered a wooden shaft,
who built it?
Was it simply previous
treasure hunters
during the 19th
or 20th centuries?
Or might it have been
someone who visited the island
much earlier to hide
something of great value?
CHARLES:
I'm going to let Craig know,
but let's just leave
everything on the table.
TERRY:
Absolutely.
CHARLES:
You know, there's so much
that we don't know
about the Money Pit area.
There's a number of tunnels.
There's a number of shafts
that we know nothing about.
TERRY:
A piece right there.
CHARLES:
You look at the history.
This is 220-some years
of searches.
If this was easy,
this would have been solved
a long time ago.
CRAIG:
Charles!
I want answers,
not more questions.
Yeah.
Ta-da.
TERRY: So there's a nice little
chunk of wood right there,
a split beam or something,
we're not sure.
-But...
-But it's upright.
-Yeah, it seems to be somewhat.
-CHARLES: Yeah.
Seems to be an upright, yeah.
TERRY:
Now we have the possibility
of some kind of shaft
rather than a tunnel.
-CRAIG: Right.
-At that unusual depth.
It's got to be a shaft.
But which one?
It's got to be between
the spot we're drilling
-and the Garden Shaft.
-Yeah.
-CHARLES: Yeah.
CRAIG:
I was really hoping that D-17.5
was a tunnel at 70 feet
and led to the vault
or a side chamber.
The big surprise was,
down 39 feet,
we start hitting wood, and
it was telling us right away,
"You are in a shaft."
What shaft?
We don't have a clue, uh,
but a big, big surprise.
We were going, looking
for a tunnel, found a shaft.
I think we have to
kind of chase this
and figure out what this is.
Yeah, it's a major,
major change.
CHARLES:
Yes.
-It changes the whole story.
-TERRY: Yep.
CRAIG:
We need to get Rick out here.
-MARTY: Hey, guys.
-CRAIG: Gentlemen.
-What do we got?
-We got a shaft, Marty.
NARRATOR:
In the Money Pit area...
-MARTY: A new shaft.
-TERRY: Yep.
...Rick and Marty Lagina,
along with Billy Gerhardt,
have joined
members of the team
where they have just made
a surprising discovery
in Borehole D-17.5.
At 38 to 39, intersected
a nice little chunk of beam
or something,
more or less vertically.
And then we've got
a ton of wood here.
So we're starting to think maybe
the 70-foot was not a tunnel.
A piece of a shaft.
-Yeah.
-So it's yet another
unknown shaft.
-CRAIG: Yeah.
-Exactly.
MARTY:
This happens a lot
on Oak Island.
We're drilling
to try and identify
what we were sure was
a tunnel at 70 feet,
and we're drilling to confirm
which way this tunnel goes.
Well, lo and behold,
what we find out is,
it's not a tunnel at all.
Totally unknown to us,
a shaft that is not on any maps
or referred to as I know it
by anybody.
What's that?
So that to me
looks like a pit saw,
where you have somebody
below and somebody above.
Yeah, all right.
That's-that's an ancient,
-ancient way of cutting.
-TERRY: For sure.
-CHARLES: Yeah.
That's how they made
milled lumber
before the age of sawmills.
NARRATOR:
Wood?
Potentially cut with a pit saw?
Dating back to
the time of ancient Rome,
this process of sawing lumber
was widely adopted by
Europeans in the 15th century
and utilized until
the Industrial Age
when it was replaced
by mechanical sawmills.
RICK:
I don't think that was cut
with a circular saw.
NARRATOR:
Is it possible
that this structure
predates the discovery
of the Money Pit in 1795?
If so,
might it be the breakthrough
the team needs in order to solve
the 228-year-old mystery?
You can see that that has
the touch of man there.
It's relatively
irregular and uneven.
So a pit saw would give
an indication that it was older.
MARTY:
So, do you think there's
any way this is pre-searcher?
-(chuckles)
-RICK: I don't know.
I-I-I don't know.
There shouldn't be a shaft
there if that's Shaft Two.
The shafts that you don't know
should be a lot older.
MARTY:
Yeah. It's more
likely to be older.
-You can't dispute that.
-No.
We're not sure what
the Garden Shaft is.
We're not sure
what number two is.
We're not sure what
this one is, so...
-Yes.
-Yeah.
That's it.
Here we go.
-CHARLES: Hey, Mike.
-What's the word?
You think we're
probably going inside
of a shaft
at this point in time?
I'd say so, yeah.
To me, at this point in time,
we just want to get
to the bottom
-of this shaft, so...
-TEDFORD: Yeah.
We've got to chase
the wood as far as it goes.
We need to know the bottom.
Yeah.
Well, let's see what's below.
-Keep going.
-Right on.
TERRY:
Thanks, Mike.
All right. Good.
-Carry on.
-RICK: Good luck.
NARRATOR:
Later that afternoon...
-Steve, you have
all the data, right?
-Yep.
...Rick Lagina, along with
fellow Oak Island landowner
Tom Nolan
and other members of the team,
arrive on Lot 10, just north
of the mysterious
triangle-shaped swamp.
Based on the data
that Peter gave me,
I calculated where
the center of the anomaly is.
This is the center location.
So the anomaly itself is
12 feet by 15 feet,
and this is the center point.
NARRATOR:
Having reviewed the GPR data
collected on his property,
Tom has given Rick
and the rest of the team
his blessing
to excavate in search of
a potential man-made dam
that may lie buried
in this area.
PETER:
So that's kind of the anomaly.
All the way across our grid.
Tom, I don't, I don't know
if you've noticed this
on Zena's map before.
But...
You see where it says
-"the basin..."
-TOM: Yeah.
...and "the dam."
It shows right here.
Tucked right in, right,
right where we are.
-This anomaly could be that dam.
-Interesting.
NARRATOR:
In 2016,
the late author and
researcher Zena Halpern
presented Rick,
Marty and the team
with a reported
14th century map of Oak Island
that she believed had been made
by members
of the Knights Templar.
It featured a number
of marked locations,
including what appeared to be
the original Money Pit,
the swamp, and the dam.
A dam which appears to be
in the same location
as the GPR anomaly
that the team is about to dig.
We've been trying to judge
this map on its merits, right?
Because we don't know
its provenance, so...
it'd be really interesting
if there is a wall.
Oh, if there was something here,
it'd be huge.
On a number of levels.
Let's bring in
a machine and dig it.
-Let's go get it.
-Okay.
-I say we don't dig
past the stakes.
-Yeah.
RICK:
There's no question
that my anticipation of a dig
on the Lot 10 anomaly
is high for me,
the interest is high...
Right here's
the center location, Billy.
BILLY:
Okay.
RICK:
...for two reasons--
Fred certainly believed
that it was there,
and the fact that Zena's map
indicates a dam at the basin.
I'd love nothing better
than for us
to ground truth something
regarding the designation
on Zena's map.
NARRATOR:
As Billy Gerhardt carefully
excavates the possible
man-made anomaly...
RICK:
I'd say we're about
-three feet down right now.
-PETER: Yep.
...Gary Drayton will
search the spoils
with his metal detector
for any potentially
important clues
or valuables.
-(detector beeping)
-STEVE: Oh, Gary's got a hit.
-Yeah, we've gotten a hit, Pete.
-STEVE: That's a good sign.
Let's see if I can pinpoint it
for you before we start digging.
It might be close
to the surface.
-(rapid beeping)
-On it.
♪ ♪
Wow.
GARY:
Wow! Look at this.
Got like a piece of iron here.
NARRATOR:
While searching for
evidence of a man-made dam
just north of
the Oak Island swamp...
PETER:
Right there.
GARY:
I'm hoping this is an old find.
...members of the team
have just made
a potentially
significant discovery.
GARY:
Fairly chunky.
It could be like
an old iron pin.
RICK:
I'd say it is.
Which you'd expect
in an old wooden wall.
RICK:
To me, it looks like
wrought iron.
That's a perfect
candidate for the XRF.
We've found over the years
that the higher the purity,
the interpretation is
that it's older.
TOM:
Yeah, it'd be interesting
-if we could get an idea
how old it is.
-RICK: Yeah.
It's a spike.
Might have been used
when a log wall,
as Fred suggested,
might have been constructed.
But what we need to do is
some scientific analysis,
some metallurgy on it.
If it's pre-1795,
before the discovery
of the Money Pit, well,
that would be very interesting.
That didn't float in.
It didn't float in. No.
Somebody put this here.
-BILLY: Gary?
-GARY: Yep.
See the piece of wood that's,
that's out of the bucket?
Just ahead of your foot.
-This?
-Yeah.
It seems to have
some kind of oil on it.
-Yeah.
-That's been shaped.
Let's see what you think.
There's a lot of that there.
Is that oil or creosote?
No, that's not creosote.
(sniffs)
No, that's not.
You know they put oil on wood
for a lot longer than creosote.
NARRATOR:
Wood? Covered in oil?
Dating back to
as early as 400 BC,
oil was widely used in Asia
for the purpose of
protecting sailing vessels
and structures from
long-term exposure to water.
Beginning
in the 13th century AD,
this manufacturing technique
was also used in Europe
until a tar-based substance
known as creosote
replaced it in the 1800s.
That's not creosote,
that's for sure.
NARRATOR:
Is it possible
that the team has found
another clue supporting
Fred Nolan's belief
that an artificial dam
lies buried
just north of the swamp,
and also corroborate
Zena Halpern's reported
14th century Templar map,
which indicates a dam feature
in this area on Oak Island?
How deep do you think
we are, Billy?
Eight feet.
-STEVE: Eight feet?
-Yep.
STEVE:
We need to go
at least three more.
BILLY:
Okay.
♪ ♪
GARY:
A big old log on there?
-STEVE: There we go.
-GARY: We got a log
and we got a plank here as well.
Like a board.
There's a piece of board.
And that's definitely
a piece of shaped board.
Oh, that's deep.
GARY:
Here you go, mate.
That's interesting.
That's been shaped.
RICK:
It's an interesting find.
It's possibly associated with
a construct in an area
where there should be something.
Which may imply original work
prior to when the Money Pit
was discovered
because there has been
no historical narrative about
any of the searchers doing
that type of work in the swamp.
BILLY:
If you come around this side,
you probably can see
the different layers,
three or four feet down.
Down there.
TOM:
You can see
the layers going down.
RICK:
Then you've got peat.
And then you've got this clay.
So...
TOM:
Yeah, you would think
anything below that
is original ground.
So, how much deeper
do you want to go?
I think this is a bigger dig.
Mm-hmm.
RICK:
What you'd have to do
is get a proper permit.
It's the only way
you'd know for sure.
-That you didn't miss it.
-Yeah.
The whole point of
this exercise is to prove
that what Tom's father Fred
found-- a dam-- exists.
The way to address that is
by getting the proper permits.
Okay, we'll reassess.
This is not an area
that we put an "X" through.
NARRATOR:
As Rick and members of the team
finish their work on Lot 10...
What do you think, Mike?
...back in the Money Pit area...
MIKE:
I think it's
the bottom of the shaft.
All right, excellent.
Thank you.
...Craig Tester,
Charles Barkhouse,
and Terry Matheson
continue to oversee
the core-drilling operation
in Borehole D-17.5.
-What you got, Brandon?
-BRANDON: 109.
-CHARLES: 109.
-109, here it comes.
NARRATOR:
It is here, just 18 feet
south of the Garden Shaft,
where they are drilling down
through a mysterious wooden
shaft in order to find out
just where or what
it may lead to.
CHARLES:
Oh, yeah, there we go.
CRAIG:
Very big chunk.
TERRY:
What do you think, guys?
I think it's wood.
I dare say, eh.
That's great.
-CHARLES: I got some more
right here.
-TERRY: Yep.
You got one here, boys.
Check that out.
And that's a solid chunk.
That is a solid
chunk of beam right there.
Oh, my God, I can't believe it.
Look at that, gentlemen.
♪ ♪
TERRY:
Wow.
-TERRY: Check that out.
-CRAIG/CHARLES: Yeah.
-See where the axe fell
in there?
-Yeah.
TERRY:
You can almost see the arc
of the leading edge
of the axe, I would say.
-Which makes it very old.
-CRAIG: Yes.
NARRATOR:
In Borehole D-17.5,
Craig Tester and members
of the Oak Island team
have just found more evidence
more than 100 feet deep
that the mysterious shaft
they have encountered
was cut by hand,
meaning that it could predate
the discovery of the original
Money Pit in 1795.
CRAIG:
That might have
enough tree rings
and body to it that we can get
a good dendro date.
-TERRY: Absolutely. Excellent.
-Yeah.
It would be fantastic
if it was pre-searcher, but...
-but who knows
at this point in time?
-Yeah.
TERRY:
It's interesting that we found
a shaft in this location.
Charles, did you think there
was a shaft in this location?
No, I did not.
If the area of the Garden Shaft
turns out
to be the Money Pit,
then, you know,
we could be looking at a shaft
that was connected
into the Money Pit.
-TERRY: Good point.
-So...
This could be the keys
to the kingdom right here.
CRAIG:
From our historical records,
there shouldn't be
any shafts in the area.
This is completely new.
Is it a shaft
that the original people,
uh, had put in
leading to the treasure?
Is it a searcher shaft
that was not documented?
We run into that problem
every once in a while.
So we got to do our homework
and, uh, figure out what it is.
I'm gonna run back
to the research center,
try to look up historical
records on the different shafts.
Then we'll get
another location picked
-following this shaft.
-Yeah.
CRAIG:
Okay, guys,
I will talk to you soon.
CHARLES:
We'll finish up here.
♪ ♪
NARRATOR:
Later that afternoon...
-ALEX: Thanks, Jack.
-Yeah.
-Laird. Helen. Emma.
-Looks good.
-How are you?
-EMMA: Hello.
-Sandy.
-So, we'll set up here.
-NARRATOR: ...Alex Lagina,
Jack Begley,
and archaeometallurgist
Emma Culligan
welcome numismatist
Sandy Campbell
to the Oak Island
Interpretive Centre.
Sandy has come to examine
the cut copper coin
that was found one week ago
by Rick Lagina
and Gary Drayton on Lot 5.
A coin which
X-ray fluorescence scanning
has indicated may predate
the 16th century.
Okay, so the thing
that we'd like to show you is
-a find on Lot 5, which we've
recently gained access to.
-Okay. Yeah.
-So this is kind of
a new area on the island for us.
-Okay.
-We only recently got access
to the lot,
so we haven't been over it
with a metal detector ourselves.
And that's what Rick and Gary
were doing when they found this.
It's very interesting.
We're not totally sure
what it is.
-Okay.
-Uh, but we have some... ideas.
-Well, let's have a look.
-JACK: I'll go grab the coin.
Great. Perfect.
Here you go.
Thank you, Emma.
Here, I'll hand it to you
in the bag.
All right.
-I'll let you take it out.
-I'll have a look.
Part of a coin.
Hopefully.
Let's have a look.
So you've done an XRF
and a CT and...
Yeah, we have. Emma, are you
able to pull that up for us,
-by any chance?
-Sure can.
-Thank you.
-It's just loading right now.
While that loads,
here's a picture.
Let's flip it to the other.
Looks like there's
some sort of...
characters or something
inscribed on it.
SANDY:
Yeah. What about, uh,
XRF?
Yes. So, I do have an XRF...
result.
And it shows high content
in copper, lead and tin
but also, um,
about .51% arsenic.
-Yeah.
-Um, and it also has
1.05% silver
in it as well.
Which, yeah, I mean,
you can get silver
-naturally occurring
with copper, obviously, and...
-Mm-hmm.
SANDY:
You know, if it has arsenic,
this is pre-1500.
For sure.
You know, if we weigh this...
Let-Let's weigh it.
This is gonna tell us
something. Okay?
This coin looks like
there's probably...
-a third of it left?
-ALEX/JACK: Mm-hmm.
SANDY:
This is probably somewhere
in the gram range, but let's...
S-So, it weighs exactly a gram,
which, you know, sort of unusual
that it would be
bang-on a gram, but...
-Wow.
-...you know,
it-it's not unusual
to see coins cut up
and used as money
in a partial payment.
Again, y-you know,
you get a coin that's this big,
and, you know,
the deal of the day
-required a third
of that copper.
-Mm-hmm.
-So you're just snipping off
a third of the coin, right?
-Right.
And that's really how barter
worked then.
Right.
Just see here.
I think this is probably...
Uh, I'm guessing
it's either Roman--
It could even be Byzantine,
but...
I'm thinking it's-it's Roman.
-Roman?
-No way.
NARRATOR: In the Oak Island
Interpretive Centre,
numismatist Sandy Campbell
has just shared
an incredible assessment
of the half-coin
found one week ago on Lot 5.
What on earth
would that be doing here?
SANDY:
Based on what I'm seeing
on the coin,
I mean, I-I see
Roman-style characters.
The style is definitely
from 300 BC to 500, 600 AD.
-No way.
-Yeah.
NARRATOR:
A Roman coin
possibly dating back
over 2,000 years?
But if so, who could
have brought it to Oak Island?
All right, so I'm gonna have
to call Rick. I want to see...
-Yeah.
-I want to see
Rick's reaction to this.
-This is unbelievable.
-(chuckling)
(line ringing)
-RICK: Hello.
-Hey, Rick.
Hey, Alex. How are you?
Good. Hey, you, uh...
you and Gary might want
to come down to the lab.
Uh, we got
some pretty interesting
information here for you.
-We'll be down A.S.A.P.
-Okay.
-See you soon. Bye.
-All right, see you. Yeah, bye.
ALEX:
This is just
an incredible moment because,
you know...
(chuckles) we got--
we have a Roman coin
on Oak Island.
And here we sit trying
to draw conclusions,
a-and it's, like, wide open
at this point, you know?
Who brought it here?
How did it get here?
Why is it on Lot 5
in particular?
It's just a total mystery
right now.
Hey, Laird?
-LAIRD: Hey.
-Can you, uh, join us on this?
-Sure.
-We'd love to get your take.
Th-This is,
like, a typical-looking Roman--
all the way
into Byzantine period-- design.
Laird, is there a precedent
in Nova Scotia of, you know,
-coins like this?
-Not in Nova Scotia.
There are precedents in the East
Coast of the Uni-United States.
-Okay, so...
-From-from archaeological sites.
ALEX:
Hey, guys!
-Hey, chaps.
-Hey, guys.
-We heard excitement
in your voices.
-Brace yourselves.
-Oh, man.
-And we came running.
-ALEX: Brace yourselves.
-(chuckling)
-Ooh.
So, this is, uh, what you guys
found on Lot 5 the other day.
And we just showed it to Sandy.
My-my thoughts--
and I think I'm,
you know, pretty confident--
that this is Roman.
-Most likely Roman.
-(laughs)
Roman, baby!
-(laughter)
-(laughs) Oh!
Have I waited for this.
Put it in probably Roman.
-That's my gut.
-Mm.
SANDY:
So...
What do you make of that?
That is incredible, mate.
Incredible!
RICK:
Run it by me again.
Why is it possibly Roman?
Well, it-it--
the design is definitely Roman.
This is definitely
a person here,
and this is a tree here.
RICK:
Oh, yeah.
SANDY:
This style is Roman.
Does the elemental analysis
confirm what you suspect
about the coin?
SANDY:
Yeah, when I--
when I see arsenic
and I see silver in there,
y-you know,
it's a very unrefined copper,
which shows that--
again, really confirms with me
that it's probably,
most likely Roman.
A Roman coin on Oak Island?
-Mm-hmm.
-What's it doing here?
So, when we were in Portugal,
we were investigating
the road that we found
in the swamp, right?
And we saw an example of
a Roman road over in Portugal.
CORJAN:
Oh. Morning.
-Welcome to Portugal.
-RICK: Thank you.
NARRATOR:
One year ago,
Rick, Alex
and members of the team
visited a number
of locations in Portugal
where the Knights Templar
established strongholds
between the 12th
and 16th centuries.
Okay, let's see
what we can find.
NARRATOR:
There, they were shown
a number of carvings
in Templar churches
matching symbols that have been
found in the past on Oak Island.
This symbol is definitely
on the 90 Foot Stone.
-Right there.
-RICK: That's perfect.
ALEX:
Yep.
The stone path
looks exactly like this.
NARRATOR:
But one of the most compelling
features they saw
was a cobblestone road
dating back nearly 2,000 years
to a time when the area was
once part of the Roman Empire.
Incredibly,
the road was an exact match
to the one unearthed in
the swamp by the team in 2020,
which is believed to date back
at least 500 years
and be of Portuguese origin.
So maybe the coin
and the road in the swamp
-are connected.
-GARY: Yeah.
NARRATOR:
Is it possible
that this Roman coin
may have been brought
to Oak Island
by members
of the Knights Templar?
If so, could it also explain
the possible dam feature
at the north end of the swamp,
the medieval lead cross
found in 2017 at Smith's Cove,
or even perhaps
the high traces of gold
that have been detected
in the Money Pit area?
RICK:
A Roman-era coin on Oak Island--
it's astounding.
It's undeniable
that there is a certain
geographic connection.
But is it Templar-related?
I don't know.
We have to put it through more
rigorous scientific analysis.
This story
is incredibly complex.
I know one thing for sure--
Lot 5 is now on the Oak Island
treasure map for sure.
-Yeah.
-(chuckles)
Sandy, y-you know,
we-we welcome your expertise.
-And if you can continue to look
into this, uh, we would...
-I will.
...we would love whatever
information comes of that.
And we need to get back out
to Lot 5.
We do, mate.
"Boots on the ground,"
-as you would say.
-Yeah.
-Thank you very much.
-LAIRD: Let's go find more.
-ALEX: Yep.
-RICK: All right, let's go.
NARRATOR:
With each new discovery
that Rick, Marty
and their team make,
the confounding puzzle
that is the 228-year-old
Oak Island mystery
is one piece closer
to finally being completed.
But as they continue
to dig all across the island,
could it lead to a discovery
that will merely change
their lives?
Or will what
they ultimately find rewrite
North American history?
Next time
on The Curse of Oak Island...
-We've never seen that before.
-No.
Oh, wow, look at this.
It's looking like some sort
of fairly large feature.
This could be important
for the whole story.
This object
is from medieval Europe.
Wow. This adds validity
to Zena's map.
RICK:
We're trying to track the gold
back to its source.
IAN:
The area in pink there
would be exactly where
-the gold is.
-Wow. That is astounding.
-Yeah.
-Let's go!
-(laughter)
CAPTIONING PROVIDED BY
A+E NETWORKS